How many people do you want to come up?
I mean, if feel got more, what more of the team coming up
to the table, then, then do that.
We, we'll probably call
'em up as, okay. That'll
work here. Okay.
Well, um, Ravi, Jeff, team, um, great to have you all here.
Um, thank you very much for the, um, uh, for the draft plan.
Um, much a good read.
Um, we, what we're gonna do is hand it over to you to start
with and, um, then questions I've told, um,
I've asked people where they've got questions.
I said I've got about two hours worth,
but, um, we'll go from there.
Okay. You're the also Thank you. Okay. So over, over to you.
Thank you. So, yeah, uh, I'm ravine chair
of the commission, chief Cooper, CEO.
And thank you for the opportunity.
No one. Thank you. Um, I'll just get onto the draft
National Infrastructure Plan.
Uh, it presents a step towards building
national consensus on New Zealand's infrastructure
challenges we face, uh, well-documented demographic
pressures from an aging population
with infrastructure investment capacity, constrained
by about five to 7% of GDP.
According to current fiscal parameters,
critical knowledge gaps exist in infrastructure,
asset management, government
and partners must improve the understanding of
existing asset condition, lifecycle requirements,
and strategic replacement schedules.
Our strategic approach must prioritize
optimizing existing infrastructure capacity and performance
before permitting resources
to new construction projects.
This will ensure we get maximum value from our current
public investments.
The draft plan delivers transparency
regarding New Zealand's infrastructure needs,
associated costs, and funding pressures.
Systematic improvements in infrastructure, project
delivery is also essential.
Deferred maintenance
and replacement programs have significantly
undermined public trust in New Zealand's infrastructure
delivery capabilities, and threatened future
consensus building efforts.
We have already conducted considerable public
and stakeholder engagement on development of the plan,
including ongoing cross-party briefings.
We expect this to be a useful input
to helping establish greater political consensus
for, for infrastructure.
The delivery of the national infrastructure plan remains the
focus for our organization through to December, 2025,
and will be followed by a government response in mid 2026.
So with that, I'll hand over to Jeff.
Thanks, ravine. Yeah, I just to, I'll just make a couple
of comments, um, and then we can get in into questions.
I think if there's sort of three things I would want you
to reflect on with this plan.
Um, the first is that when we have put forward
what we think is a level of expenditure that we can afford
as a country, we have first
and foremost started with what, um, what it means
to be sympathetic to the household balance sheet, right?
That is where we have started.
We haven't assumed
that there will be new funding tools coming along,
and we've had a long, you know, decades long conversation
about potential new funding tools.
When we see those funding tools change,
we will change our, our forward guidance.
And so we're starting with what we can,
what we can see right now.
We've noted in there that New Zealand currently spends, uh,
among the top 10% o of the OECD,
the amount we spend on infrastructure.
We are also, um, trying to show folks that when it comes
to New Zealand's infrastructure, um,
when we look at it on a per capita level basis,
a a different story actually emerges.
Uh, we are the same size as greater Sydney in terms
of population, but we are spread over a landmass
that's 21 times larger.
When we start comparing our assets, uh, to places like that,
the, the story actually looks a little bit different, right?
So we have sort of six stadiums of capacity over 30,000.
Um, Sydney has five, right?
In New Zealand flies
to about 20 airports around New Zealand.
Sydney has two, two airports, right?
So when you start looking at per capita stocks, uh,
a a slightly different story emerges.
I think that that helps us understand levels
of affordability and what we can expect.
We go further with that to understand
what a new capital budget actually looks like,
a non-renewals, new capital budget, right?
And we, um, the, the detail there is
that New Zealand over a 30 year period has in the order
of $125 billion to spend on new services.
That helps place, uh, why I think it is difficult sometimes
to get big projects across the line, not necessarily
because we can't get political consensus on them, but
because in fact, the trade-offs
of those very large projects, uh, are real
and mean that we can't get services in other areas.
Um, or it might mean that, uh, user charges
and taxes would, would need to be higher to, to do so.
So the first one there is affordability.
The second, uh, that Ravine has already alluded
to is renewals.
We as a commission are very fortunate
to have been directed to think long term.
Um, what that means is that we have to think
through renewal cycles, um, how, uh, cities, communities
are positioned to continually fund the maintenance
and eventual renewal of the services, um,
that they will rely on.
Um, we have said that of every dollar, um,
that we spend on infrastructure, that some 60% should be on,
uh, maintenance and renewals.
Um, in the long run, when, uh, demand drivers are reduced,
uh, that number will tend towards a hundred percent, right?
And my conversations with communities
and areas, uh, that experience less population growth
will tell me that the 60% number is far too low, right?
Um, so in the long run, maintenance is almost everything.
Um, the third thing that I would sort of highlight, um,
before turning over to you, Mr.
Chair, is the role of demographics in the plan.
Demographics are central, uh, to everything in the plan.
They're central to, uh, the demand that we see
for new infrastructure services.
You know, one component of that is more people,
more services and, uh, statistics New Zealand, uh,
released its updated population projections,
actually just a few weeks before we, we released this.
Um, but I think it's worth dwelling on this, that the,
the low to high projections from statistics New Zealand put
New Zealand, uh, at a population of somewhere between six
and a half million and 12 million by 2078.
That is an enormous variation. Mm-hmm. Yeah.
Um, and that really focuses the mind on
what the challenge is for asset owners.
That it's not always clear
where the demand is when it will pop up.
And if you get that decision wrong, it means carrying assets
that can't, can't fund themselves
or have to be funded from other other sources.
And I can give give examples if you're interested,
but the, the, the uncertainty there is real,
and it is what asset owners talk
to us most frequently about.
Uh, we have, um, areas of course that are growing,
but similarly, uh, we have areas that are stagnating
or projected to decline, right?
Uh, this is less front of mind
because growth infrastructure, I think oftentimes
occupies the psyche.
Uh, but 56
of the 67 territorial authorities are expected
to either flatline or decline, uh, into the 2030s.
Uh, so thinking about
how we manage services in a world
where there are less funders around, again, is an area of,
uh, immense concern, I think,
and increasingly will, will become, um, top of mind.
The reason why we are talking about it is
because the assets that we build today oftentimes have, uh,
asset lives of a hundred years that, um, that need
to withstand these demographic changes.
The second part of the demographic story, which, um,
is built into the plan is how we are aging, uh,
and, and start contrast to the uncertainty
that comes about from how much we will grow.
Uh, our aging is far less uncertain.
Um, we will go from a population of, uh,
or from a, um, uh, state
where we have seven working age people
for every retiree in the 1980s to a world at the back end
of this plan, where that number will be two to one.
Um, that of course has enormous implications for, uh,
our fiscal capacity to fund infrastructure.
Um, a point that is made right up front in the strategy.
Um, but it also has wide reaching implications for the types
of services that we require, uh, that relatively speaking,
we will need more infrastructure for older populations
than we will for, uh, for younger populations.
And this is fundamentally what is driving a lot
of the recommendations through the,
for guidance of the plan.
Um, and of course, increasingly will be baked into, um,
business cases, uh,
for infrastructure services in the, in the future.
Um, let me just end by saying that the draft plan is,
um, firstly a draft.
So we're very much in full consultation mode at the moment.
There is a legislative process with the minister, which goes
for three months from, uh, from June 25,
but we're also running a public
consultation period of six weeks.
Um, as, as well, the draft plan
is not one that will sort of sit on, on a,
on a bookshelf and date.
We are looking at this very much
as an operational plan for the commission.
Uh, and the various elements
of the plan we will be updating,
and I'll just quickly go over those.
The Ford guidance, which is our assessment of, uh,
capital investment requirements by sector.
We intend to update, uh, every, every couple of years, um,
as we get better, better information.
Um, the national infrastructure pipeline, which is, uh, uh,
all of the projects that are in planning around the country,
will be updated on a three monthly basis.
We work with about 120 different organizations
around the country to, to reflect, uh, what is in planning,
and then the, uh, infrastructure priorities program, uh,
which is the, uh, menu at our project level of advice and,
and readiness assessment, uh, will be updated one
to two times, uh, a year.
And on those three operational matters, I have, um,
behind me, uh, the directors responsible for those.
So Nadine Dodge is responsible
for the infrastructure priorities program.
Uh, Mac Kerr is the director of data science
and analytics who runs the national
infrastructure, um, pipeline.
And, um, uh, Graham Campbell, uh, the director of, uh,
research and economics runs the Ford Guidance
Program, uh, as well.
And John Butler we have here who's been coordinating,
um, the, the plan.
So with that, I'm happy to hand back to you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you both. And, um, thank you for such free
and frank, um, uh, advice to start us off with.
Um, I'm gonna keep, we've try
and keep the questions quite tight if we can,
just picking up on the first one of 'em,
because as you've come before and, um,
we're talking about demographics
and how central those are to the plan, I've sort of said
for 40 years we should have a
demographic strategy of some sort.
Um, how,
If we Said, I mean, that range, you've got between sort
of less than 5 million
and 12 million, um, in terms of being able to plan anything
for infrastructure without some sort of greater degree
of certainty, how difficult is that?
And secondly, how much of what we are pro what
what you are thinking about in terms of going forward.
'cause you talk about 125 billion to spend on new services
that, well, that will obviously depend on
how many people you're, you're dealing with,
whether it's 5 million
or 12 million or something in between.
Um, what proportion of, um,
expenditure do you see being necessary for growth?
Yeah, if we are five, presumably virtually none, um,
if we're at 12, presumably it's a heck of a lot.
But how do we, yeah. How do we work on that, that sort of,
Yeah. So, um,
on, on your, on your first point around, um,
uncertainty, um, there, as, as I, as I said
before, this is like front
and center for, for all, all asset owners,
there are different types of uncertainty, right?
Um, and I would sort of differentiate between two,
particularly the first is a question of timing.
When is the growth going to come, um, uh, such
that we might need a service?
Um, and so, uh, you know, I'll take the case of Auckland
where historically our population projections have been
for the last 20 years.
It's not true overall in fact,
but just for the last 20 years have been, um, undershooting.
Where Auckland has got to
this essentially is challenging asset owners
to figure out when is the right time
to bring the asset along.
It is fundamentally a financing challenge
because if you bring the asset on, uh,
earlier than perhaps you, you should, according to demand,
it means you might need to hold debt
for a little bit longer, right?
So you've got a financing risk there.
The second type of problem is if you get the
direction wrong, right?
So rather than growing your, uh,
community actually starts contracting, right?
And this is a much more serious problem.
This is not a financing problem.
This becomes a funding problem.
Uh, and if you have a funding problem, it means
that the users aren't turning up to use the asset, right?
Um, this is one that asset owners worry about far,
far more in, in many ways.
Um, so there are different types of uncertainty in,
in different, um, sectors.
Uh, I would point to something like
where we see the most uncertainty is an area like, uh,
corrections where our ability to forecast demand is
not to be too flippant, like pretty hopeless.
We get the direction wrong all the time.
So it's a, it is a type two problem.
Um, uh, for for many other types of infrastructure,
I would take something like, um, electricity where, uh,
MBS projections have been wrong on the downside
for a decade or or so.
Um, uh, you know, that, that is a, a sector that's, um,
that know the actual demand
for electricity has been relatively flat.
So what to do in those situations.
Um, I think where we point to in the plan is that buying,
if you're not sure when demand is gonna come,
buying options is better than buying assets.
Um, leave the option to buy the asset,
but do some of the initial work so
that when the demand does come,
you can turn it around quickly.
Um, to give you a concrete example of what this looks like,
like land protection, right?
Don't wait until moments
before you decide you need the asset to go and buy the land.
Um, buy the land, buy yourself some
options, um, before that.
Um, so that the implementing those strategies
of investment under uncertainty is, is critical
for, for infrastructure.
Um, your second question is about, uh,
how our advice would change under different,
particularly population growth estimates.
We have, um, put forward a, uh,
a expenditure number as a proportion of GDP, um, which
of course is, is tied to, um, population growth.
So if the, if the, if the population were to grow less,
obviously the capital budget would be less,
but our advice of the proportion
of GDP would remain constant,
and that's actually why we've chosen that
as a metric rather than, um, front footing with,
with headline numbers, notwithstanding the fact
that I gave you the, the headline number under
the median just before,
Um, I don't see any other hand.
Okay. I'll go to Julianne.
Thanks so much. Um, I had a couple
of different areas of questions.
Maybe if other people have questions, like
You can take one and then Yeah, yeah.
Then unless there's in video else, I'll go one,
and then you can have another one back again.
Um, I was wondering if you could just expand on like,
some examples of what using our
existing infrastructure better before new capital investment
and expansion might mean particularly in the transport
space, please.
And, um, and I had a question about
recommendations for change.
Um, one of the recommendations
for change is transport system reform,
and it says land transport funding gap is closed
by requiring user charges to fully fund planned investment.
Would that be true of all types
of projects or just certain projects?
Because, um, given
that there isn't full pricing for time of use
or use of highways, um, you know,
in most places there's some transport subsidy needed
for public transport.
Um, I wouldn't think that investment in some big,
well, some improvements
to public transport could be funded from
user charges, but mm-hmm.
Yeah. So I was just wondering if that is applies
to all transport or just certain projects?
Yeah. Yeah. So the advice, maybe I'll start with that one
and then I'll, I'll come back to the, um, making better use
of existing infrastructure.
Um, where we are going with on that is that, uh,
the, the, the, that the network itself should be able to pay
for it for itself now, except in,
in transportation there's questions of what networks, right?
Freight networks, um, uh, eroding networks,
CT networks, and so on.
Um, what, what we're saying here is that as a starting point
that everyone using that network should sub, should,
notwithstanding the fact
that there might be cross subsidies within the network.
And I would, I think this is an important point.
So, um,
if you think about the way electric transmission pricing is
done, there are cross subsidies across the network,
but the network is a whole pace for itself.
Um, it is, it is a lower bar than the bar
that has held up to say, um, the airlines industry and the,
and the airlines industry.
Um, the bar is much higher.
Uh, there we say, uh, essentially if you look at jet stars,
um, uh, route coverage, um, you know,
they will probably not extend new routes
unless they can get a profit above zero,
um, on that new route.
So for them, each part of the network needs
to have a profit above zero.
Um, what we are holding up for transport is less than that.
That the reason why we think that this is important is
because it creates pricing tension within the sector.
Uh, and one of the most notable things about the
transportation sector is that on a per capita basis, um,
we have been spending, um, enormous, um, uh,
amounts on transportation, uh,
over the last two, two decades.
I think there is a, um, a chart in your pack comparing, uh,
electricity per capita, um, spend to transport spend.
Mm-hmm. I, from the top of my head,
I think the per capita number
for electricity is in the order of 50%,
and for transportation at per capita number is
400% increase.
So we've seen a very large increase in transportation.
At the same time, we have seen a sort of breaking
of the ated model, uh, in transportation,
and that essentially has, yeah, that's the one there, yeah.
Has reduced the sort of pricing tension on the sector, um,
uh, to minimize capital expenditure.
So part of this pricing, um, advice is,
is about right sizing the capital,
the perceived capital investment requirements
for the sector, so that that areas
of investment that have no chance
of funding themselves off the asset base can still occur.
And I think that that's really I important part
of this advice is that, yes, there is a, um, part
of the plan that is saying we need
to tighten up the user charger elements of, particularly
for networked infrastructure,
but the motivation for doing that is to release funding
for social infrastructure
because funding, um, infrastructure like hospitals
and schools, um, correctional facilities, justice
and so on, these are areas of the system
that will never fund themselves.
Um, and so by tightening up the areas that can we,
we release, uh, an ability to,
to hit the infrastructure we need in the social space.
Um, on your question about, um, how we go about doing that,
I think that the pricing instruments in transportation are,
um, you know, when you stack them up against
how we do it in electricity, are found wanting, you know,
we don't have congestion charging, um, in place.
The time of day stuff looks far more important.
We're considering that later on. Yeah. Yeah.
So, you know, so these are things that, um,
we think will make a big, big difference, um, uh, in,
in constraining the, the capital side of things as well.
Um, does that answer
Yeah, if, can I just do one follow up
On if, if it's a quick one?
Yeah. Yeah. I then I, then I'll go just to, I, I,
what I'll do is I'm not gonna
worry about subs or anything like that.
I'll just go ki and Carlos. Um, Dan, so far,
I, I think as politicians
and this committee in particular, we hear a lot from, uh,
people in the sector, um,
or in certain areas of the country who are saying,
government, if you build us this road,
um, we're gonna invest.
There's gonna be heaps of jobs,
there's gonna be economic benefit,
and the people who build those projects
or saying, you know, we want a pipeline
of these projects into infinity so
that we can keep building them and making money.
Um, would, what would the commission's advice be
to politicians who are trying to take on board, you know,
your expertise and advice versus that sort of like, lobby
that's just like, just, you know, we believe us,
if you build this, there will be economic benefits,
even if you don't, you know, it's not gonna pay for itself.
And, um, there's, yeah.
Yeah. Um, I think one of the answers to this
lies in, um, my earlier comments around the renewal cycle,
um, and being able to get through the renewal cycle.
Um,
ultimately, you know, you want to build assets
that have a high enough usage of them
that the users are then able to pay for the ongoing upkeep
of the asset, um, uh, in, in the future.
So I think in the, in the plan,
we asked this question noting
that there are fiscal constraints.
I think a natural question is to ask, well, when can we go
outside of those fiscal constraints?
Because the truth is those fiscal constraints look actually,
um, they're quite confronting.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, when you look over a a 30 year period,
I mean, we are running structural deficits that get us
to a number of 150% net core crown debt to GDP.
I think that's concerning. Um, there's obviously some policy
questions there that go outside the, the realm of, um,
of infrastructure, but we look at that and
and say, well, if that's the case, trying to hit our numbers
of somewhere between five
and 7% of GDP actually looks pretty
challenging in that context.
A natural question is to say, well, how can we go
outside of those numbers?
And there's many different types of infrastructure that
actually will not be flustered
by those fiscal constraints at all.
Um, regulated utilities have their own, um,
have their own funders.
And so, uh, you know,
if they can put forward high quality projects
that people are prepared to pay for, actually that doesn't,
the fiscal stuff doesn't matter so much, um, to that.
Um, so when it comes to road to, to transportation, um,
the, clearly there is a much tighter link between, um,
the asset and, um, fiscal constraints more, more generally,
which I think become relevant.
So our advice to this is if you want to go outside of those,
um, those fiscal constraints in the first instance,
you could do it, uh, within, um, base load,
but it means, it probably means getting less social
infrastructure, at least you wanna raise
taxes, and that's the choice.
Um, if you want to go outside of that
and do, um, uh, say an economic PPP
or something that where the asset is gonna pay
for itself when it comes to, uh, the, uh,
the roading example, but more generally the process,
we wanna show, what would you need to see to believe
that this road, uh,
or asset is gonna be able to pay for itself.
Um, and in the case of roading infrastructure, we show that,
that we would need to see costs, uh, that are
below $32 million per kilometer usage that's
above 40,000 users per day.
Um, and, uh, what's the last one?
Cost, usage, and thank you.
And travel time, which is, um, greater than 15 minutes.
If you manage to hit those three things, your, um,
the willingness to pay the toll will cover the asset, um,
and the ongoing maintenance costs,
and it gets you outside of your fiscal constraints.
So I think that's the question you can ask is if,
if this is true, not withstanding the initial stimulus,
which is entirely a separate issue, right?
The, in the initial stimulus comes and goes.
And I have been reflecting on the, the recent, um, coverage
of Y me debt, which I think is an interesting one, right?
The stimulus has come and gone, the project's been built.
The question is now, can you fund the project
through its operations and maintenance?
Uh, and if you don't have enough users,
you know, we've seen what happens.
Mm-hmm.
Um, okay. Ki then Carlos, then Dan, thank you.
Um, thanks to you and your team for coming in.
And I wanna acknowledge the briefings
that you've given us leading up to the announcement of the,
the launch of the draft.
Um, I found the conversations
that we've had incredibly useful
to understand your intentions
and what you have to get from this.
Um, so I'm gonna ask this question in the context
that we've had plenty of chats before,
but I, I've been interested in, um, uh, some
of the things you've indicated that you talked about how
your observations in the draft are on the assumption
of current funding tools,
which I can understand why you do that.
Um, but then we've also talked about scenarios that you've,
uh, labeled that indicated
to financing would be challenging.
Fiscal constraints are quite confronting.
Um, once we go through this process, public submissions,
the government reports you settle on a final report,
consciously said that it will be fluid.
Do you think you'd ever be at the point
where you might be able to indicate if, uh,
the funding tools were different, what could be achieved?
So you sort of touched on that from a
user pay perspective there.
Mm-hmm. But you also indicated that, uh, if, uh,
government taxation doesn't change, I,
I'm paraphrasing here, then we're gonna
be limited in what we can do.
So these are legitimate debates,
but they're debates that can often get politicized.
Now, as an independent agency, uh, is there a role
that you could play without pushing
for a particular avenue Correct.
To indicate this is what we can do under current settings,
these are what we could do if things change,
these are the options that could fill that void.
Yeah. Um, so where,
where I would sort of go to on, uh, the,
on the funding issue is that a lot of this comes back
to project quality, right?
That if we can demonstrate we have good projects
that have users that are willing to pay for them, all
of a sudden, um, the funding looks kind of different.
I think where we've often got tripped up is
that the projects themselves are unable
to satisfy that condition.
Um, and if we're trying to, to put forward projects
that don't have enough users,
we're always gonna end up throwing our arms in the air
and saying, we've got funding problems.
Um, that just seems like a natural place to, to end.
Um, what we are trying to do
through the infrastructure priorities program is,
is really do just that.
We are looking to, um, uh, put forward a menu
of options that can say actually like, here's a set
of projects that potentially could pay for themselves,
or, um, here's the, the, the things that we would need
to see to believe that they could pay for themselves.
Right. Um, let, let me, let me give you an example.
Just like a, a sort of corner example of this.
Um, in, in Norway, they're building a, a road from, um,
uh, from Norway through to Germany.
It's a prefab tunnel, right?
Um, it's very expensive, billions of dollars.
Um, but it's got a high usage
'cause people are going from, uh, one busy city
to another busy city.
And this role, uh, this,
this tunnel is generating enough revenue from the tolls not
only to pay for the capital cost
and ongoing maintenance costs o of the, of the tunnel,
but also is enough to start funding hospital infrastructure.
In other words, the quality of the project is so high
that it solves its own funding.
It solves its own funding problem.
Um, and I think fundamentally, if we're looking at projects
that create funding issues, we need
to ask questions about, uh, costs.
Can we do this cheaper timing?
Do we need to wait until we see more users for the project?
Um, you know, and,
and other things like, like regulatory issues and whatnot,
but how to bring that down to an area
that actually does make value
and eases some of the, the funding things.
So that's, that's, that's the test that we're running
through the infrastructure priorities program.
So in time, I would hope to be able to come to you with a,
um, you know, a longer list than just the 17
that were released a, a month or two ago
and say, um, you know, here are some projects that,
that make this easier for you as a decision maker.
Carlos? Yes.
Just, just refer some of the information you give to us.
I mean, um, you definitely use United Kingdom Germany
as a, as a, as a sample.
Yeah. But, um, I can see all your page. Is that on?
I don't know what patient. Okay. They don't have a patient.
At least we can see which one it's carry on is. Yep.
So, um, I can see all your recommendation are based
on the Germany model.
So can, can you, can you,
can you tell you expand a bit more,
a more information why you use you United King income as,
as a, as a comparison here and,
and what's going on with them as well, with the way they
invest in their, uh, the
Sure. Well, um,
I mean the, the genesis of
that chart really was a, was a conversation that we had
with the folks from the, the UK who were grappling
with this idea of pipeline certainty.
Mm-hmm. And, um, you know, the chart demonstrates, um,
I think electrification of the rail network
and uh, uh,
one country is taking a very much on off approach to its,
um, Its investment into the network.
And the other is taking a much more programmatized approach.
Um, I think, you know, our motivation for using
that chart was that there are some things, uh, that,
that have a low amount of uncertainty.
We know we're gonna have to do them, right?
And the, the plan goes some way towards saying, you know,
the starting point of this is maintenance.
Um, but there might be other things as well, um,
where we should really be able to start programatize it, um,
and smoothing this off.
And that would be a win for the sector.
Um, because, you know, um, uh, pipelines ultimately,
if they can be built up of, um,
things like not contracts from NZTA, which are, um,
very steady and very certain, um,
this starts helping the sector understand
what its pipeline looks like.
Um, and I think with, you know, the, the motivation
for using this chart is to say that it's been done
before we, we can do it. Mm-hmm.
And also, I think there's another, another,
another figures you show me that the later on, on the report
as well, um, this one time of use price and fraud.
So based on the, based on the,
based on the diagram you showed me,
there's one in forecast disappear.
So can I understand more, like,
so where's the risk of the people?
What, what's happened are using, uh, some other form
of public transport, or are they, um, you know, just go
to the, to the city at different timing or,
or like what extremists, you know, where,
where the affect the, the, the, the city center
or can can give us a little more information?
Yeah, I, we can, I, I'll have a first go at this
and I, Nadine, if you want to add to this feel, feel free.
'cause Nadine has done quite a lot
of work looking specifically at, um, at the Stockholm case.
But I think for a start the picture, um, there is, uh, uh,
a provocation because there's a lot
of cars on the left and not many on the right.
Sure. The first thing I would say is that, um, uh,
you don't have to take many cars off the road
to go from gridlock to free flow
because the marginal cost
of the next car actually gets really, really high.
So that's, that's the first point.
The, the, the second point is sort of, um, you know,
where have these cars gone?
Um, and in that instance that was looking at a peak,
um, period of time.
Um, so some of those cars have, uh, have
gone into the inter peak, right?
Um, earlier
or later, which is important from a capital investment point
of view because for roading networks, a lot
of the time we are investing for peak.
So if you can smooth that peak,
it actually means you buy yourself a lot of future capacity
and, and can avoid, um, capital investment.
Um, some
of those people will have gone onto public transportation
networks and other modes.
Um, and, and then others,
and I think this is probably one of the more,
more interesting ones that we don't think about all
that often is that they will avoid the trip altogether.
Um, and uh,
and this is what's quite interesting to me, right, is that
by putting a, a charge in place,
you might actually just see some trips stop altogether.
And those are, um, you know, maybe it is the case, um,
that rather than going to a, um, chiropractor,
you know, a few suburbs away, that instead you just say,
okay, I'm just gonna go to the one round the corner, right?
And it's those micro decisions
that a charge is asking consumers to make,
and the reason that we're asking them
to make those decisions is
because it's a very costly time to get on the network.
Um, so Nadine, I don't know.
Yeah, that was good. Yeah. Okay.
You can follow up with the specific version.
This is the businesses
or retailer being affected in those areas.
So certainly in, um, I can, I can comment on New York,
it's a different city altogether, just for different,
but certainly they have seen the opposite effect,
right? There is,
You see the business are doing much better
because they got this car going into the
Yeah. They've seen more people,
people traffic as a result. Dan,
Hey, thanks Mr. Chair. Thanks,
uh, to you and the team for the plan.
Two questions. The first is,
so you've got this project pipeline
that you've established all the projects
and the dollar value, and it looks very daunting.
It's kind of like, where do you start? How do you fund it?
Um, what I, what I hear from you is that you're gonna kind
of go away and say, here's the high
value ones out of that list.
And what I hear from you is that actually it's high value
for foreign
or not foreign investment, high value
for private investment.
Is that what I hear from you is that high value ones
that probably could be, um, funded
by private investment. Mm-hmm.
So I'll, so the difference between,
so there's two products here.
Um, the first is the national infrastructure pipeline,
and we are not making any judgements on
what is in the national infrastructure pipeline.
We are simply going around to, uh, to all
of the organizations that do capital
in investment in New Zealand.
And we are asking them to tell us what their intentions are,
um, where the projects are at,
and planning how their intending to fund them, what level
of certainty they have, um, and, uh,
and when we might see this coming up for, say, procurement,
so that we can signal those things to the market, um,
uh, that is a tool that we are using, uh, as part
of our legislative mandate to coordinate the sector so
that folks can see, um, what is going on around them.
Um, and, uh, the coverage of
that has increased dramatically.
I, I don't wanna get ahead of myself here,
but I think that New Zealand might have better visibility
of its infrastructure planning than
almost any other country in the world right now.
The reason why I say that is
because, um, you know, we've obviously looked at other,
other pipelines.
We think we've got about two thirds to three quarters
of all capital expenditure.
Um, as a way of comparison, the UK
re re-released its national pipeline a couple of weeks ago.
They had circa 550 billion in their pipeline.
We have, um, we have over 200 billion in ours.
Um, so proportionally the size of a country, um,
those numbers should proportionally
be somewhat more similar.
The differences we, um, are talking to a, a,
a much wider group of, um, organizations.
So I think there is some confidence that you're starting
to see like a very decent picture of all
of the planning that's going on.
So I think that that's a, that's a step
in the right, right direction.
Um, the IPP is different.
The infrastructure priorities program,
this is a voluntary program.
So, um, a agencies, the private sector elect
to send us their projects that they have in planning.
Um, we then, um, uh, well,
there's a triage point of this, so it has
to be nationally significant.
So we're, we're sort of, we're not doing the sort of 10
and $20 million ones.
These are the sort of more, more big projects.
Uh, and then we are essentially stewards over an
independent process, right?
So the business cases will come to us, uh, we will either
evaluate them internally or in some cases,
if we don't have the expertise, we will, um,
get an external reviewer.
That appraisal will then go to an independent group of five,
uh, expert panel who will make sure
that the appraisal was done in line
with the evaluation framework we set out
and is published on our website.
Uh, and we'll assess the project against, um,
three criteria, strategic alignment value for money, um,
and deliverability, uh, and, uh,
and then give it a, a stage of readiness, right?
Stage one being, yep, we agree you've got a problem,
but we don't think you've got a solution just yet.
Stage two is you've got a problem
and you've got a range of potential solutions.
And stage three, uh, which is investment ready.
And the intention here is
to provide a bit more vis visibility
to both decision makers today, but actually
because infrastructure has such a long life to it,
and we all all know that planning takes a long time,
this is, is just as much a signal to future decision makers
as well so that they can understand where a project is at.
If a project is at stage one, which is that we think
that there's good consensus, they've got a problem
moving quickly to a funding decision, um, and,
and executing shovels on the ground,
you can expect time delays and cost overruns
because the project isn't quite there yet.
You can't avoid the need to go through these things.
Um, and so, uh, it's, it's, as I said
before, our project level of, of advice on the readiness
of the project and, um, what, what the next stage is sort
of likely to be right at the moment.
Um, uh, we, we released, uh, round one of that,
um, and there were the 17 projects, um,
that have been endorsed at various stages.
We will be running this process, um, once
or twice every year, um, to give you an idea of, um,
you know, where we might end up.
It, it took Infrastructure Australia
that runs a similar process, took them sort of three
to four years to build a mature list of projects.
Um, so I would orders of magnitude expect that length
of time before we see something that's more mature.
I don't know if, uh, Matt
or if Nadine want to add any comments to that pipeline
or IPP if you've think I've covered it.
No, that's pretty good. Okay. Yeah.
Awesome. Thank you.
Um, the other one is more drilling down
to the time of use pricing.
Um, curious,
you've just come back from New York understanding the
New York, um, implementation.
Uh, this committee is considering the time of use charging.
It'll just be curious on any kind
of lessons learned from your observations over there, uh,
as we prepared to kind of deliberate
and discuss how do we set up the framework for New Zealand?
Yeah. Um, firstly,
the commission is very encouraging of this work.
Um, uh, I think we've said in the past
that this might be the single biggest thing we can do
to improve, um, infrastructure services is getting transport
pricing, uh, right.
And the plan sort of speaks to that,
the strategy in 2022 in some ways, um,
went into more detail on congestion charging, um, the,
um, well, I was in, uh, New York with the minister a couple
of weeks ago to, uh, understand more deeply the outcomes
of the New York congestion charge.
So thank you for the, for the question.
It's not often you get to see a new congestion charge put in
because these things are not done very often,
and I think these are probably one
of the more difficult urban policies to get in place.
Um, as a general comment, I would say
that the policy has outperformed what was expected of it,
um, which again, is a surprise.
So often I think we're, um, you know, we don't always,
the policy doesn't always kind of achieved
what was intended, but in this case,
it's actually achieved a lot more than what was intended.
So the, the traffic time, time delays have dropped
by 25% in Manhattan.
I used to live in New York, um, uh, in the 2010s.
And, um, it was not uncommon for, um, you know,
for roads just to be completely backed up.
Um, I, I would never take an east to west bus in Manhattan
because you could literally walk faster,
uh, than, than the bus.
Um, this has all changed quite dramatically.
Uh, the, um, the bus system which works on the east to west,
um, AXI is now functioning.
It works. Um, they're looking to improve services
and get more, um, uh, throughput on that.
Uh, the, um,
travel times in the CBD have I increased by 15%,
um, and travel times over the river crossings have declined
by six to 42%.
Um, so these are quite big numbers.
Um, what is interesting in terms of, well, actually a couple
of other things that, uh, are tangential to,
to the main story about, um,
moving some cars off the network
for faster flow noise complaints within the zone dropped
by 45%, which is quite a big deal if you live in New York,
very loud city.
Um, and crash related injuries are down, uh, 15% as well.
Um, which the MTA when we talked
to them about said these things, we need
to make more of these, these things.
Um, um,
on a approval rating ratings,
clearly this was a difficult scheme to get in, in place
because you've got city level, state level, federal level,
and aligning, um, the politics
between those three levels is, um,
actually far more difficult probably
than, um, than New Zealand.
We have a very streamlined system.
That was something we heard a lot over in New York.
Um, but, uh, what is interesting is that approval ratings
for the scheme have started just as we saw in Stockholm, um,
have started to outweigh opposition, right?
So there's more people that approve of the scheme than,
than disapprove of the scheme.
And interestingly enough, the approval ratings
for private vehicles coming in from outside
of the city has increased as well.
And that has been one of the most important, um,
changes in the last three months
because it has somehow quietened the resistance
to congestion charging if, um, you know, once the,
the private vehicle owners see
that they can generate some pretty serious time savings, um,
that's an important sort of constituency.
So what, what,
what lessons from the MTAI point to a couple of things.
The first is that, um,
the MTA was very good at setting up a, um,
real time data analytics unit to coincide
with the congestion charging.
Um, it is mission critical to get the findings
of congestion charging out so that you can shape the,
or provide the evidence base of what's actually happening.
Um, they reiterated the need, the need to do that.
And so I have been encouraging that that is done, um,
that we can get the evidence fast so that people can,
can see the benefits.
On, on the, on the flip side, I think the MTA, um, was,
um, very, um, constrained by the fact
that the scheme was written in some detail into legislation.
Um, and so they feel quite handcuffed in some ways
that they can't iterate the scheme.
Um, I, I have sort of given the advice
of don't let the perfect be the enemy
of the good when it comes to scheme design.
You're gonna find a lot of naughty issues in there.
Um, uh, you know, don't get held up
by those issues would be my advice.
They, because their scheme is written in such detail,
they actually would have to go
through quite arduous processes to change the scheme.
Um, and, uh, my sort of advice would be flexibility is key
and, and the ability to iterate is key.
Um, also the ability to change the price, uh, so
that you maintain the travel level savings
is important as well.
And who, um, you know, who,
who has autonomy over that price.
And so, again, the model I would look to would be autonomy
with appropriate economic regulation in place.
Uh, the congestion charging scheme in New York starts off at
$9 and we'll go up to $15 over the next,
uh, five to 10 years. Thanks
Very much. Yeah,
That is Very, very helpful. Yeah. Thank you.
Um, Tangi, uh, yeah, thank you Mr. Chair. Um, thanks.
I want to just, uh, move to local government
'cause you've, you've touched on that briefly
and um,
obviously local government has quite a significant role
to play, but also in terms
of sector investment is quite a significant chunk.
The figure that you floated in terms of stagnation of 56,
outta 67, um, councils all flat, all flat lining, um,
in the 2030s, which is not that far away,
is, is pretty concerning.
So you've got this form of consultation process,
which is ongoing at the moment, um, albeit to a timeframe.
What, what's the conversation
with the sector looking like in terms
of a real understanding of, of what that is going
to mean if there's no change?
Yeah. Um, so I think
that there's different discussions happening in different
local governments around the country.
Um, what I would say is that local governments, um, uh,
function and the need to have a balanced budget
and their fiscal constraints means
that these issues will pop up more readily
than we see in central government.
Where central government has, uh, a bigger balance sheet
to actually probably, I don't wanna say hide,
but maybe conceal some of the, some of the, um, um,
infrastructure, um, asset practices that actually,
'cause we, we make the point here
that in some ways local governments,
asset management practices look ahead
of central governments practices.
Now, I think, not withstanding that fact, their issues
around infrastructure are more prevalent and visible
because they're constrained from
what they can do from a balance sheet perspective.
So, you know, if you look at the, um, example
of the Hawke's Bay recently
where they said they're gonna be cutting their expenditure
on, um, water services
because of fiscal constraints, you're starting
to see a little bit of
what this demographic shift looks like.
So if you look across all of the TAs,
they're all at different stages.
Auckland's trying to deal
with like, how big are we gonna be?
Um, where are we gonna grow?
All of these stuff, these things, rural pay,
who district council is thinking,
how on earth do we maintain our assets?
Um, and rural pay who doesn't look different,
they look ahead of the curve, right?
Um, and that is the message I think to, uh, to all of, um,
new Zealand's TAs, is to think very carefully about
how many assets you need
and what you can maintain in perpetuity.
Um, and to build assets that have a high likelihood
of, of being used.
Um, so you know, these,
these are kind of different messages to what you hear in,
in the world of infrastructure.
'cause we are really looking at infrastructure from a
micro point of view.
How many users are there? What revenues being generated?
Um, can you see yourself through a, through a renewal cycle?
And that looks harder and harder for TAs that are,
um, not generating growth.
Another way of looking at this is that growth,
population growth has allowed local governments
to grow in ways that, from a financial point of view,
don't always look very good.
Um, we published a report,
actually Graham's report on this, looking at the fiscal, um,
the fiscal upside
of new population growth in different cities,
and the extent to which that new population growth is able
to cover the costs of the infrastructure to support them.
And, uh, the high level findings is
that the new population generally contributes somewhere
between 30 and 50% of all growth.
In other words, growth seems
to be weakening the balance sheet of the city.
Now, my interpretation of this is that there has been a sort
of local government, um, approach sort of,
let's call it a, a grand compromise in local government
where, uh, around the council table there is often a debate
of, well, do we want to grow?
Do we actually want to grow?
Because the district plans
and zoning requirements actually
make growth pretty difficult.
That's the truth, right?
Um, and so growth is, I think,
contested at the local government level.
Um, but a compromise is reached to say, okay, we'll grow,
but will grow in areas further away in areas
that don't have crowding effects.
They don't create neighborhood issues
and so on and so forth.
And the reality is that to service those areas
from an infrastructure point of view is very expensive.
It means longer roads, more pipes per household,
more distribution lines.
And all of that means that when you try
and maintain those assets
with not very many people, you're gonna struggle.
And, uh, and that is, it comes out, I mean, uh,
the chair would know about this because
Wellington is a great example.
A hundred percent. Yeah.
We're upperly schizophrenic on some of this stuff, yeah.
Country. Mm-hmm.
So the growth, I guess what I would say here is that
that grand compromise comes undone when you start
to look at renewal cycles.
Can I pick you up on that? So what, so the,
what you said is that growth effectively,
we've got the mantra of growth pays for growth,
which I think is a hundred percent right.
But what you are saying is that historically it's paid
for about 30 to 50% of growth.
Yep. Yeah. I can see where that will come,
come very, very fast.
Um, just picking up on your, um, the comment you made about
expecting to grow and then getting it wrong,
not only in timing, but in direction.
I don't think you're looking further than the city.
Sorry, What was that? I don't,
you've gotta look any further than the city.
Yeah. 'cause the expectation of the growth looks like that.
The reality at the moment is that,
and it may stay like that.
Um, so yeah, that's an interesting, that's interesting,
but I, I really wanted to ask you about the transport area,
and it's particularly the GPS
and whether the GPS is a model, which actually is a problem
because what it does is it, um, to be blunt, it means
that ministers make decisions about where money goes,
which are probably unrelated to strategy,
and that goes to cut for, um, governments of every color.
Um, is that a problem? And do we need a different model for
how we allocate a transport
Funding? Mm-hmm.
So the, the draft plan,
uh, identifies the problem, um,
and the problem as we see it is that investment intentions,
um, far exceed the willingness to pay, correct.
Yeah. Um, and I think it would be fair to say
that we are testing this
and testing what are the different kind of interventions
that you might think about, um,
to bring those two things in line?
Um, the original system, of course, I think in many ways was
designed to sort of solve this problem, right?
Like have an independent, um, board, have a ated fund
and have a GPS that sort of signals a direction
and that should bring these, these two things in line.
But the last 10 years have taught us that, um, uh, that,
that that probably hasn't been adequate, um, to make sure
that, um, that, um, willingness
to pay an investment is, is more aligned.
Um, I have some sympathy, um, for, uh,
uh, ministers of transport who their communities, I think
ex think they do have the levers, um, of these things
and, um, don't often see the budget constraint.
Um, and my thinking on this is, this is a,
the real question here is
who do you show the budget constraint to?
Uh, right now, regions arguably don't see the budget
constraint very well at all.
They don't understand what this project might mean
for other competing, um, projects.
Um, they might look at, you know, we've seen numbers as high
as $400 million per kilometer of new roading.
Um, really large numbers.
Um, because, uh,
their emphasis might just be on, well, we need
to enable housing.
Um, and so, uh, you know,
i I, and this is a bit more just kind of me, um,
speaking sort of outside the realms of the plan.
You could imagine a world where you have more regional based
model, uh, where there are allocations to the regions
and that they can see the budget constraints, uh,
a little bit more clearly.
Um, I think that's worth kind of, kind of tapping
or kicking, kicking, um, the tires on.
Um, but yeah,
but we're, we're sort of early, early in our thinking about,
um, about how you could,
how you could respond to some of this. So,
So look, can just to finish off that bit,
and then I go to, I think I had Cam
and Julianne, I think that's the way I had it,
or maybe I'll go Julianne and Cam.
Got you. Um, I'm just, but so,
but we've, I mean, I, I've, I've talked to regions
where they've said literally we, we pay more fed than
and r than we get back.
So they're not, they're not saying we want more than we
actually paid, but our roads are literally falling apart.
Our bridges cannot take the weight of the trucks
that need to go across 'em.
We are an export, re export, generating, um, area.
Um, we need help. Mm-hmm.
We actually, all we need is we need back what we're getting
and it's being sucked up by other projects.
So, um, regionalizing some
of these things would go down very well in some areas
that we do catastrophe for other areas.
But, um,
I, yeah, I think, I think that's right.
And the question would be, well, how does
central government ex exert noting the point
around the expectation, right?
Because there's still gonna be expectations on central
government and how to have a, a sort of safety valve
for those things to be executed.
Um, so it might be that, for instance, the, um, a minister
of transport, you know, um, elix, the governance
of more regional bodies or, or so on.
But yeah, you'd need to think through those things. Um,
And I won't ask you how we get across the public.
Can't afford to do everything. Um, Julianne, oh
Yeah. Well, I guess my
question, it, it's a little related,
it's not entirely related,
but it was just around commenting on project transparency.
One of your recommendations is all business cases,
budget submissions and advice
to central government infrastructure
investments are published.
Would that, would it be fair to say that at the point
that a government is, you know, weighing up options,
determining, um, prioritization, et cetera, all of
that should be publicly available before decisions are made?
Is that how it would be in most countries
that are doing this well?
Um, and the reason I ask,
and I'm not you know, it is just that, you know, we got some
information back from NZTA about program prioritization
where they say, well, first the board's gonna consider it,
then cabinet's gonna consider it,
and then it's gonna be published.
Is your recommendation
that this stuff be available earlier in the process
for public debate?
Because that is related, I guess,
to the public's expectations, the ability of public
at whatever level to see the expected costs
and benefits helps them understand
trade offs and prioritization.
Yeah.
Um, the, the simple answer to that is that, um, you know,
through the IPP, we're trying
to run a very open, transparent process.
So for each of the 17 projects that are endorsed on
that list, you can go to our website
and read the, the independent review of those projects.
Um, you know, I think for, for high quality projects, um,
uh, transparency is really important for public confidence,
uh, in those projects.
Um, and, uh, you know, I think we've, we've published, um,
work looking at transparency, particularly of large,
large projects, noting that it hasn't been very good over,
you know, a long time periods.
Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, I was just, I know you don't wanna, um, drill down
to individual projects and the merits of,
but I'm just interested as to the threshold of
what defines a large project in planning stages.
As per your schedule here, uh, of, you know,
the national infrastructure pipeline, I put it to you, um,
because, uh, the Northwest Rapid Transit corridor, AKA,
the dedicated busway 4 billion potentially is not in there.
But yet NZTA have endorsed it, um,
endorsed the investment case for it.
Uh, the project status on NCTs website is consenting,
um, their community information sessions being held at the
moment on Saturday.
Uh, the alignment seems pretty well established.
The property acquisition seem well, knowing
the stations are already being built, yet, it's not in here.
I just wonder what the threshold is.
Are you referring to the pipeline or to the, the pipeline?
P The pipeline, yeah. Um, well, the
200, the 207 billion pipeline,
My expectation is that it should be in there.
Yeah. Um, uh, if it's not, it's
because we haven't received it from the organization.
I will. Yeah.
If you're referring to the list Yeah. Fan.
Um, that's a hundred million plus
that does not have funding.
Yes. So if it is funded, have that list.
That's a list of options and opportunity costs.
Yeah. Okay. So it's, yeah.
NZTA board have ticked off its investment case.
Does that Okay. Presume funded.
Yeah. So, so it might, in that case, if that's the case,
and we can double check this.
Okay. It should be in the pipeline, but it just won't be on
That list. Secondly,
Oh, It is,
It is on the list. Which one
Is it? Oh God,
It's like two thirds down North West
Rapid transit improvements.
Anyway. Is it on that list?
Yeah. Okay. It's very small, but it's very
Small. I went through it two or
three times. Okay.
I have another look. Um, secondly,
the additional harbor wider crossing.
Don't have another look. Um,
Yeah, sorry. Um, just
it's, it's in the actual plan itself. It's
Might not table, it's the plan. The table might
Not, the slides, the slides were kind
of like a, it was a presentation
I gave. Okay. Okay. That's
Good. So it may not
Well be on that. Yeah, yeah. No, I
just thought the size
of it warranted it anyway.
The additional harbor crossing, uh, you've got the, um, does
that factor in a bridge or a tunnel or both?
And, and as far as, you know, the, the, the construction
and the timeframe, uh,
have you taken a bob each way on that?
So again, this is the information that's been
provided to us by wakata.
So what we, we are not making any judgments here.
This is what Wakata are telling us. Mm. Yeah.
Okay. Okay. I don't know. 'cause there's a wide range.
There isn't. The harbor tunnel could be
between 15 and 30 billion on.
That's right. And I think I,
I would interpret large ranges as being the proponents
of the asset is still working through the options,
which in this case is, is
Okay's true. And finally,
um, Mr.
Chair, CRL, um, given the size
and scale of that project,
we don't know when it's going to be open.
We don't know the final cost,
but I suppose what concerns Auckland is,
is the operational cost.
10 years ago it was put at a hundred million dollars.
And we, some of us wrote to the auditor general, um, 2023,
it was put at $200 million per annum.
There's a real chance that,
and that's 10% of Auckland council rate payers rates.
Right. There's a real chance that this could open
and it could be cost a million dollars a day to run,
you know, without the, without even
before you factor in fair box recovery.
And I just wonder, is that a concern for you guys?
Uh, I mean, operational costs are always a concern.
Mm-hmm. Um, because you need the rating base
to to, to fund it.
So, I mean, look, I don't know about the specifics
of, of this one.
Um, but these are coming back to the, to the issues i I open
with, which is that at the outset, you want to know
what these things are.
Um, clearly with the CRI mean, we did a, we did a,
a review on the CRL
and one of the things that sort of came up through
that was trying to, we, I don't think we had a,
a particularly good clear view in the business case
of the CRL, what the upstream
and downstream infrastructure requirements are.
And like the most obvious one of those was level crossings
and what would need to be done with level crossings in order
to get the full capacity of the CRL.
Um, these are, I think, really important, um, lessons when,
one of the ones that I would sort of reiterate here is
that when we are doing business casing
of capital investment, um, it is essential
that the operators are part of that.
Um, if the operators are not part of that discussion, um,
it tends to leave in our experience,
leave gaps in understanding what these whole
of life costs are. Okay.
I'll leave it at that. Okay. Um, what I'm gonna do
with your forbearance, we, 'cause we've already had one
break, um, if you are okay to stay
for another five minutes Sure, that would be great.
So we'll go to 11, uh, 1145.
So Julianne, you've got the next question.
Um, the recommendation I'm learning from projects, um,
I think is really important.
And I was just wondering if,
if there's any insight from other jurisdictions about
whether it should be like an independent organization,
maybe like yourselves
or someone else who's was charged with that evaluation
because, um, yeah, I mean,
again, I'm, I know I'm focusing more on transport,
but like NZ TA have done some random post implementation
reviews, but like, not in a systemic way
and it doesn't, it seems like maybe leaving it to them isn't
going to be successful in getting the regular
implementation reviews we need.
Yeah, I think that, um,
ex post reviews are really important.
Um, there's, there's different ways of doing this.
Some, I mean, we have, um, you know,
you could do ex post on say the delivery.
Um, was it to time to budget, uh, I actually,
before I start that we, I should say we are looking into,
um, what a program like this would look like currently, um,
and sort of, um, trying
to figure out all of the different components.
So one is looking at the sort of, uh,
deliverability outcomes of it.
Um, was it a time, was it a cost?
Um, the second, um, part of this that we're looking at
that I think you are actually getting to is
the business case said we would have this many people
going through the turnstiles.
How many did we actually have?
Um, uh,
and that is the sort of thing
that I think would be really useful
for decision makers to understand.
You know, we made a decision based on this kind of, um,
demand forecast and we were either way above or way below.
Um, you know, I think that can be instructive in helping,
helping us learn.
So that's something that is on
Radar, not trying to give you more work,
but it makes sense given the, um, uh,
infrastructure priorities program maybe that,
like it was someone like the infrastructure commission, some
of these post-implementation reviews, um, to see,
I mean, given you've got that process for
checking whether the business cases stack up beforehand,
then going back and looking at them
and seeing if they actually delivered.
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, we're, okay.
Can I ask a few quick ones to, to finish off of them?
Um, first one, in terms of asset management planning, um,
now I was looking at it from a local government perspective
where we have the audit, OOAG has told us
that consistently every council in the, well,
pretty well every council in the country has been under
investing in water for by fact about 25% for donkeys years.
Um, and,
but they haven't seen it about it really,
they've whispered at, at best.
Um, but can potentially the OAG have a role, not just
for local government, but also for central government,
for those non, um, revenue earning, um, assets
and saying, Hey, you're running down your hospitals,
you're running down your schools, police stations,
whatever else, the water systems, whatever it might be,
that is not good enough
and call that out big time so that we start getting
to the right level of asset management
for those non-regulated, um,
or those non, um, uh, revenue earning, um, assets.
Yeah. Or if and if not, then who?
Yes. Okay. No, great, great questions
and exactly the sort of things we're,
we're thinking about as well.
I think, um, I would start
by saying we have a missing function in New Zealand.
We do not have asset management assurance.
Um, we had, uh, uh,
the crew out from Infrastructure New South Wales, um, who
do perform this function.
Um, and they essentially gave agencies a five year runway
to improve their asset management outcomes.
And then they do rolling, I think 12 to 18 month reviews.
And they have demonstrated that
that has been a very useful process to improve capability
and continue shining the light, uh, on, on those issues.
Um, what is clear to us is
that when you think about the different oversight mechanisms
we use, or incentives that we use for people to maintain
or agencies and organizations to maintain their assets, um,
you know, if if it's private infrastructure,
it's a profit motive, right?
If you don't maintain your, your hotels,
people won't stay at them.
And local government land, um,
central government does a pretty good job of overseeing them
through the LGA, but they use a process of transparency
and audit for regulated utilities.
They go a bit further and say, uh, if you got up
to scratch you, you'll lose your operating license.
Or there might be fines
that gets you a hundred percent in the dollar
well maintained assets.
When we look at central government, we see the use
of CO 23 9, which is the cabinet circular,
which sets requirements for what agencies should be, um,
where they should be at.
This has been in place for about 15 years.
Um, I think increasingly I'm coming
to the view that this doesn't work.
Um, uh, and, uh,
and so the plan really is asking this question,
what will work, what would give you the confidence
as decision makers that the assets
that you have purview over
are being well maintained, uh, and operated.
Um, and so, you know, we think that that could, um,
require converting CO 23 9 into more
of a legislative tool, um, perhaps.
Um, but I think that there's some,
some thinking to be done there.
So I think combined with, with something
that's a bit sharper, um, with, uh,
an asset management assurance capability
and you starting to get the toolkit you'd need to,
to bring this, um, up to scratch,
That's very, very helpful.
And look, I think I better take, um, last, um,
I might might sneak to,
but certainly one, um, is there any value I, we,
I think conversation we were having at, um, wasn't it, um,
about, of political parties actually saying, okay,
we've here, here what you've gotta say, um,
giving us giving you our views, individual views
to help inform your decision making,
or just confirm that we're all off on the wrong track.
We are all on the wrong track, not you.
Do you mean in terms of feedback
from Yeah, feedback the plan?
Yeah. Yeah. So we, we would really welcome, um,
your feedback on the plan.
Um, we of course have been briefing political parties, um,
as, as we go.
Um, so the, the public consultation period ends,
can somebody give me the date?
Sixth, sixth, 6th of August. So that's not too far away.
Um, I think if, if that date is is um, is too tight,
we'd be quite happy to come
and talk to you, uh, actually at any time.
But, uh, the next big date
for us is when we get the ministerial feedback, um,
six, six weeks after that.
Um, and our intention then,
once we've received feedback from, um, consultation
of which we're, I think we're well over like 1200
responses, um, from around.
So we've got a lot of work to do to get through that along
with the ministerial feedback.
We will then come back, um,
and provide briefings, uh, on where we're up to
before we finalize in in December.
Okay. No, that's really very cool. Mr.
Chairman, can I just finish on that particular matter?
Uh, no, no. Okay. Well, I'll just finish one other one.
My other one question that I got Damien to finish off,
and that's, you've got a table in, in the document
and on page 42, um, which gives us of the percentage of GDP
that you're expecting in each of the different areas.
There's one area that stood out to me because I went, Ooh.
Um, which is the water
and waste, you are expecting actually the proportion
of money spent of the GDP spent on water
and waste to decline.
Mm-hmm. And given that all, everything
that everybody's been talking about is actually you've got a
deficit in that area, can you just square that circle for
Us please? Yeah, yeah,
I can, um, I might ask Graham Graham to come up
and kind of, um, expand on what I'm saying,
but, um, essentially
what we see in water is an enormous deferred maintenance
problem right now.
Um, you know, this is, this is most acute in,
in places like Wellington,
but we we're seeing it, we're seeing it,
Right?
Um, deferred maintenance is like a blip in the,
um, in the demand projections that like,
once you've maintained, once you've sort
of renewed something, you don't keep renewing it.
Um, you hopefully get into a steady state of, of maintenance
around that, that asset.
And so, um, clearly there's a lot of work to do
to overcome this deferred maintenance,
but then when you actually look at the assets in place
and the number of people using them, uh, it is a, um, it,
it's a lower number and it declines.
I think, well actually Graham, maybe can I get you
to make some further comments on
that? I think like the, the
Come come up to the table, Graham?
Yeah, sure.
Yeah, absolutely. Um, just for reference
to Graham Campbell, I'm the director of economics
and Research commission and my team was responsible
for putting together some of that forecasting.
I think the first thing I would say on water is
that this country currently spends a lot
of money on capital investment in water.
So in contrary to what we hear in sort
of potential the media, this co the,
we are a high spender in water.
Um, the amount of money that we've spent on water as a share
of our GDP has been elevated for the last 15 years, um,
at basically historic highs over the last 150 years.
So we're at a really high level of spending on water.
The benchmarking work that we looked across countries
as well highlighted that our level of spending on water is,
um, amongst the highest in the developed world
as a share of our GDP.
So what I, what we're putting forward in thinking
for guidance is looking at sort of those long-term trends
around population growth and income growth
and thinking, well, as Jeff said there,
there was a clear period
of underinvestment in water happening from sort
of the late eighties of the early two thousands.
Um, and then sort of woke up
and we were investing a lot more.
What the forward guidance is just putting forward is this
idea of sort of a more normalization of the level
of investment in water
because, um, if we continue spending the levels
that we're spending at right now,
then we'll be building an asset base that might become sort
of unaffordable
and unsustainable for local government,
um, you know, in the future.
And so what that number represents is more sort of a, um,
more a long-term trend in water.
So you can think of the period that we're in right now,
say the next 10, 15, 10 years
or so as a catch up period from the underinvestment period.
But then after that, we're expecting that to sort
of come down to a period of what I'm calling normalization,
moderation in the level of investment in water.
Okay. Thanks. And, um, dam, just finish off, sorry.
I'm sorry, I've just kind of crack my nose in,
but it's an interesting area on on
that one in particular, if I might, Mr. Chen.
Well, it's gonna be the last question 'cause
otherwise we've gotta finish at 10 too.
Okay. So why would we spend more when arguably we're a
country that has one of the most reliable sources
and access to water cost most of the world.
Why would we be spending more relative to other countries?
Is that a basic flaw in the proposition?
And, and if so, isn't it important to challenge that
before we just keep throwing good money after bad?
I think it's a good point.
I mean, there's a, the frameworks around water,
so resource management act, getting the consents,
they're all included in the cost,
the way the projects are delivered, the decision whether
where the money's being spent, all of that is part
of the challenge we've got here.
So if we, if we,
and it's not just to do with water.
I think it's a, it's a trend a across infrastructure
One really small one on, it's very quick.
Is there the, the plan as such,
and I'm sorry I'm not over it all.
What was there a cross party was the process
of developing it, one of consulting with the,
all the political parties
For the, for the plan. Yeah.
Um, I think we, we have consulted with all, well talk,
let's say briefed all of the political parties after
It's developed, Uh, uh, dur during
what we briefed on was still a draft, the approach to it.
Yeah. Still a draft.
It's gotta go through another process.
Yeah, no, no. Yeah, I, I guess the issue is, I, you know,
to get cross party bipartisan long-term support,
the development of that, rather than b******g
and fighting over bits of it, you know, I would've thought
that that would've been a core with such an essential
component of our economy going forward, that that should,
should have been the basics of how it was developed.
It might actually be worth just a little bit on,
on Graham's process here.
So what, what we have done is
I taken a very asset based up approach to this.
So we've been looking at understanding
what do the asset bases look like across the country, uh,
and then we are essentially applying
depreciation rates to those.
So we're trying to understand what would it take
to maintain those assets.
And then looking at what Graham talks about core
drivers of demand.
So is the income going up such that people wanna pay
for higher levels of service?
Are there more people around? Um, and so on.
So we're looking at those core things
to arrive at a view on whether or not, um, more
or less is needed in area.
It hasn't been, okay, what assets do we need in 2050?
And working back from that,
it's been from the ground up. No,
And we couldn't do that because the level
of uncertainties in place over that period
of time would just make you, you would be, be wrong.
We have covered a lot. Yeah. Right. We need to quits.
I, I think we, some of us can carry on for hours.
Um, we might actually ask
to have another conversation at some
stage, but thank you very much.
Really appreciate it. And, uh, can I just say thank you
for the, the work that's gone into it so far, you know,
to just to read through that and go,
this is good stuff. Great. So well done.
And we really appreciate your interest as well.
So thanks for, um, having
Us back. We'll be on the phone
to have another conversation.
I think saying the level
of uncertainty is a terrible excuse.
That, that is just crazy.
That, that's, that's a recipe for failure.
Damien, if you don't have Dam Damian, I'm sorry,
I can't help myself, Damien, I'm afraid.
I'm afraid. The problem is that they all put a mirror up
and we would all have to look at it.
No, I I it's our, it's our collective. I agree.
It's not, no, it's not pointing finger. It's same. Yeah.
Well, thank, thank you very much.
Really appreciate it. Yeah,
Thank very much.